# Simulaticn components {#simcomps}

\tableofcontents

## What are simulation components?
Simulation components, or simcomps fo short,  incapsulate additional
functionality that may be useful for certain cases but not necessary to run the
solver.
This can include computation and output of additional fields, in-situ
post-processing operations, data sampling, etc.

By design, simulation components can tap into every aspect of the simulation,
so they can be quite powerful.
As the code grows, we expect to add more and more simcomps to the code.

## Adding simulation components to the case
Each simcomp is defined as a single JSON object at are added to an array
of objects called `simulation_components`, which resides directly under the
`case` object.

## List of simulation components

The following is a list of simulation components that are currently available
in Neko. The list will be updated as new simcomps are added.

- Computation of vorticity field \ref simcomp_vorticity
- Computation of \f$ \lambda_2 \f$ \ref simcomp_lambda2
- Probing of fields at selected points \ref simcomp_probes
- Output of registered fields to an `.fld` file \ref simcomp_field_writer
- Computation of the derivative of a field \ref simcomp_derivative
- Computation of forces and torque on a surface \ref simcomp_force_torque
- Computation of the weak gradient of a field \ref simcomp_weak_grad
- User defined components \ref user-file_simcomps
- Fluid statistics simcomp, "fluid_stats", for more details see the [statistics guide](@ref statistics-guide)

## Controling execution and file output
Each simulation component is, by default, executed once per time step to perform
associated computations and output. However, this can be modified by using the
`compute_control` and `compute_value` parameters for the computation and the
`output_control and` and `output_value` for the output to disk. The parameters
for the `_control` values are the same as for the fluid and checkpointing.
Additionally, one can set `output_control` to `global` and `never`. The former
will sync the `output_` parameter to that of the fluid. Choosing `never` will
suppress output all together. If no parameters for the `output_` parameters are
 provided, they are set to be the same as for `compute_`.

For simcomps that compute 3D fields, the output can be either added to the main
`.fld` file, containing velocity and pressure, or saved to a separate file. For
the latter, the `output_filename` keyword should be provided. One can
additionally provide the `precision` keyword, which can be set to either
`single` or `double` to control the precision of the written data.

For example, in the `tgv` example case the `vorticity` component is executed
once per 50 time steps. The `output_` parameters are synced to that, and the
vorticity fields will be added to the main `.fld` file.
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~{.json}
{
    "type": "vorticity",
    "compute_control": "tsteps",
    "compute_value": 50
}
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

### vorticity {#simcomp_vorticity}
Computes the vorticity field an stores in the field registry as `omega_x`,
`omega_y` and `omega_z`.

### lambda2 {#simcomp_lambda2}
Computes \f$ \lambda_2 \f$ for the velocity field and stores it in the normal output files as the first unused field.
This means that \f$ \lambda_2 \f$ can be found in the temperature field in then fld files if running without a scalar
and s1 if neko is run with one scalar.

### probes {#simcomp_probes}
Probes selected solution fields at a list of points. This list of points can be
generated in a variety of ways, but the most common is to use the `csv` type.

#### Supported types:

 - `file`: Reads a list of points from a CSV file. The name of the file is
   provided with the `file_name` keyword. The CSV file should have the
   following format:
   ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~{.csv}
   x_0, y_0, z_0
   x_1, y_1, z_1
   ...
   x_N, y_N, z_N
   ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
   The points are assumed to be in the same units as the simulation.
- `points`: Reads a list of points from a JSON file. The points are specified
  based in the `coordinates` keyword and should be a list of x,y,z values.
  The file should have the following format:
  ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~{.json}
  {
    "type": "points",
    "coordinates": [
      0.0, 0.0, 0.0,
      1.0, 0.0, 0.0,
      0.0, 1.0, 0.0,
      0.0, 0.0, 1.0,
      ...
    ]
  }
  ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
  The points are assumed to be in the same units as the simulation.
- `line`: Generates a list of points along a line. The line is defined by two
  points, `start` and `end`, and the number of points to generate, `amount`.
  The points are generated by linearly interpolating between `start` and `end`.
  The line is defined as:
  ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~{.json}
  {
    "type": "line",
    "start": [0.0, 0.0, 0.0],
    "end": [1.0, 1.0, 1.0],
    "amount": 10
  }
  ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
- `circle`: Generates a list of points along a circle. The circle is defined by
  a center, `center`, a radius, `radius` and the normal, `normal`, the number of
  points to generate is controlled by `amount`. The points are generated by
  rotating a point around the center starting from the specified axis projected
  onto the circle. The circle is defined:
  ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~{.json}
  {
    "type": "circle",
    "center": [0.0, 0.0, 0.0],
    "radius": 1.0,
    "normal": [0.0, 0.0, 1.0],
    "axis": "x",
    "amount": 4
  }
  ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
  Leads to the following points:
  ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~{.csv}
  1.0, 0.0, 0.0
  0.0, 1.0, 0.0
  -1.0, 0.0, 0.0
  0.0, -1.0, 0.0
  ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

 #### Example usage:
 ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~{.json}
 {
   "type": "probes",
   "compute_control": "simulationtime",
   "compute_value"    : 1,
   "fields": ["w","s"],
   "output_file":  "output.csv",
   "points": [
      {
        "type": "file",
        "file_name": "points.csv"
      }
    ],
 }
 ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
This probes the fields 'w', and 's' in the points described by points.csv and
outputs into output.csv every 1 time units.

The probed information will be saved in the output file in the following format:

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~{.csv}
N_p, N_f, fields[0], fields[1], ..., fields[N_f-1]
p_0_x, p_0_y, p_0_z
p_1_x, p_1_y, p_1_z
...
p_N_p_x, p_N_p_y, p_N_p_z
time_0, p_0_field_0, p_0_field_1, ..., p_0_field_N_f-1
time_0, p_1_field_0, p_1_field_1, ..., p_1_field_N_f-1
...
time_0, p_N_p_field_0, p_N_p_field_1, ..., p_N_p_field_N_f-1
time_1, p_0_field_0, p_0_field_1, ..., p_0_field_N_f-1
time_1, p_1_field_0, p_1_field_1, ..., p_1_field_N_f-1
...
time_N_p, p_N_p_field_0, p_N_p_field_1, ..., p_N_p_field_N_f-1
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

### field_writer {#simcomp_field_writer}
Outputs registered 3D fields to an `.fld` file. Requires a list of field names
in the `fields` keyword. Primarily to be used for outputting new fields defined
in the user file. The fields are added to then `neko_field_registry` object and
are expected to be updated in the user file, or, perhaps, by other simcomps.
Since this simcomp does not compute anything `compute_` configuration is
irrelevant.
 ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~{.json}
 {
   "type": "field_writer",
   "fields": ["my_field1", "my_field2"],
   "output_filename": "myfields",
   "precision": "double",
   "output_control" : "simulation_time",
   "output_value" : 1.0
 }
 ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

### derivative {#simcomp_derivative}
Computes the derivative of field along a chosen direction (x, y, or z). The
field to derivate is controlled by the `field` keyword and the direction by the
`direction` keyword. The simcomp will register the computed derivatives in the
registry as `d[field]_d[direction]`, where the values in the brackets
correspond to the choice of the user keywords. Supports writing the computed
fields to disk via the usual common keywords.

 ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~{.json}
 {
   "type": "derivative",
   "field": "u",
   "direction", "y",
   "output_control" : "simulation_time",
   "output_value" : 1.0
 }
 ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
 
### force_torque {#simcomp_force_torque}
Computes the force on a specified zone and the corresponding torque
around a center point. The compute control specifies how often they are
computed and printed into the log. Scale specifies a scale for the computed
force/torque. Conventient if one wants to scale with the area or similar. long_print is default false and can be set to true to print all digits in the calculation.
Subroutines used in the simcomp can be found in src/qoi/drag_torque.f90

 ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~{.json}
 {
   "type": "force_torque",
   "zone_id": 1,
   "center": [0.0, 0.0, 0.0],
   "zone_name": "some chosen name, optional",
   "scale": 1.0
   "long_print" : false
   "compute_control" : "tsteps",
   "compute_value" : 10
 }
 ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
 
### weak_grad {#simcomp_weak_grad}
Computes the weak gradient of a field. The weak gradient is value of the
gradient multiplied by the local value of the mass matrix. This is how a
gradient term appears in the weak formulation of the governing equations. The
field to derivate is controlled by the `field` keyword. The simcomp will
register the computed components of the gradients in the registry as
`weak_grad_[field]_x`, `weak_grad_[field]_y`, `weak_grad_[field]_z` where the
value in the brackets corresponds to the choice of the user keyword. Supports
writing the computed fields to disk via the usual common keywords.

 ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~{.json}
 {
   "type": "weak_gradient"
   "field": "u",
   "output_control" : "never"
 }
 ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
