---
layout: post
title: Neko v1.0.0
author: neko
---

This is a major release introducing several significant changes in terms of features and functionalities, user interaction, and code improvements.

# Release Notes

## Changelog

#### Major updates / features
- Support for multiple (arbitrary number of) scalars.
- Support for scalar statistics and averaging any registered field.
- New matrix-free algebraic hp-multigrid preconditioner.
- C API with bindings for Python and Julia.
- Native global interpolation, supporting both CPU and GPU backends.
- Support for Collective Communication libraries on accelerators (NCCL/RCCL), both for reductions and point to point communication during gather-scatter operations.
- Support for injection of components. Currently supported: Source terms, Simulation components, LES models, and Wall Models.
- Support for cyclic boundary conditions.
- Simulation components:
    - Support for differential operators `gradient`, `curl` and `divergence`.
    - Full support for LES models on all backends.
- Source terms:
    - Application of a centrifugal force
    - Support for application of a sponge source term based on a reference velocity field.

#### Minor changes / fixes
- Registries, both scratch and global registry now supports vector and matrix types.
- Gradient jump penalisation is put under the source term umbrella.
- The `elementwise_average` approach to estimate the filter lengthscale in LES is changed from average length evenly shared by each GLL point to average GLL spacing.
- Simulation components:
    - `vorticity` is removed and replaced by the more general `curl` operator.
- Source terms:
    - `user_pointwise` is removed.
    - `user_vector` is replaced by the `user` source term.

**Full Changelog**: https://github.com/ExtremeFLOW/neko/compare/v0.9.1...v1.0.0

## Breaking API changes

A couple of features of Neko have been overhauled. This mean previous user files will need updates to support Neko v1.0

- The case file structure has been updated.
- The interface of user files have been updated.
- Global registry of fields `neko_field_registry` have been renamed `neko_registry`.

/ᐠ. ｡.ᐟ\ᵐᵉᵒʷˎˊ˗
